## sdiol: Software-Defined IO for Linux

`sdiol` (pronounced: "style") extends standard IO devices, like keyboards and
mice, with sophisticated features like multi-layered keymaps and network
serving.  Possible use-cases include:

* Converting caps lock into a control key.

* Configuring left shift key to be a shift key when held or an escape key when
tapped.

* Configuring the f key to be an f when tapped or to convert the h/j/k/l
keys to behave like arrow keys while f is held.

* Configure multiple keyboards with different keybindings.

* Share a keyboard and/or mouse between multiple desktop/laptop computers over
the network so you don't have to constantly plug and unplug devices or keep
multiple keyboards and/or mice on your desk.

`sdiol` operates at the device level, so it works equally well in tty, X
windows, or Wayland environments.


## Building

`sdiol` depends on `liblua.so` and `libsystemd.so` to build.  You should
probably have some packages called `liblua5.3-dev` and `libsystemd-dev` or
something on your system.

Then just run:

    make


## Running

Here is the output of `sdiol --help`:

    usage: sdiol local              # modify local keyboards
    usage: sdiol serve [host] port  # serve local keyboard on network
    usage: sdiol connect host port  # read from a network keyboard

    options:
     -h, --help           print this help text
     -c, --config FILE    set config file (default /etc/sdiol/conf.lua)
     -v, --verbose        print useful info while running
         --timeout N      exit after N seconds (for testing)
         --systemd        run as systemd Type=notify service

`sdiol` requires a lua configuration file to run (see below for details).  By
default it looks for `/etc/sdiol/conf.lua`, but we can also specify a file with
the `--config` option.

So let's start by creating a file called `conf.lua` with the following content:

    -- the f key will expose an alternate layer to the keymap when held
    f_keymap = {
        -- when f is held, convert h/j/k/l to arrow keys
        KEY_H = KEY_LEFT,
        KEY_J = KEY_DOWN,
        KEY_K = KEY_UP,
        KEY_L = KEY_RIGHT,
        -- also convert u and i to left and right parentheses
        KEY_U = shift(KEY_9),
        KEY_I = shift(KEY_0),
    }

    root_keymap = {
        -- caps lock is way too useless of a key for your home row
        KEY_CAPSLOCK = KEY_LEFTCTRL,
        -- assign f to have different behavior on tap vs hold
        KEY_F = dual_key(KEY_F, f_keymap),
    }

    -- use a case-insensitive regex to identify the keyboard device(s) to grab
    grab_keyboard(".*keyboard.*", root_keymap)

Now we will do a test run:

    sudo ./sdiol local --config conf.lua --timeout 20 --verbose

The argument meanings are as follows:

* `sudo` is required because we are trying to claim hardware devices

* `local` means we are intercepting a local keyboard

* `--timeout 20` means "exit after 20 seconds", so if we lose the ability to
type `ctrl-c`, we don't have to reboot the computer

* `--verbose` will help us debug our config by printing key names after each key
press and by printing device names at startup or after a new device is pluged in

If you don't see a line like `grabbing <your keyboard name>` you may have to
edit the regex in `conf.lua` before continuing.

Now, while the `sdiol` process is running, you can open a text editor and
verify the following behaviors:

* The caps lock key has become a control key

* Tapping f types an f (but not until the key is released)

* Holding f does not type an f, but instead turns h/j/k/l into arrow keys and
u/i into left/right parentheses for as long as you hold f

* All other keys behave normally


## Configuring

`sdiol` is configured in lua.  A config is required, and can either be at the
default location (`/etc/sdiol/conf.lua`) or at a location given by the
`--config` option.

The lua functions available for configuration are as follows:


### `grab_keyboard(REGEX, MAP)`

Grab any keyboard with a name matching REGEX and assign it a keymap of MAP.
REGEX should be a string and MAP should be a lua table with string keys.  The
keys of the table should be the names of linux inputs, as you might find either
through the use of the `--verbose` flag or by looking them up in
`/usr/include/linux/input-event-codes.h`.  The values in MAP indicate what
action should be taken when the corresponding key is pressed.

There are four types of actions:

* a key name, such as `KEY_A`

* a `dual_key()`, to indicate a key which can one of two actions based on
whether it is tapped or held

* a `macro()`, `shift()` or `ctrl()`, to indicate a sequence of keys

* another keymap like MAP, to indicate that a key exposes an
alternate keymapping on the keyboard


### `ignore_keyboard(REGEX)`

Don't grab any keyboard with a name matching REGEX.  Multiple `grab_keyboard()`
and `ignore_keyboard()` functions can be in the configuration, and the first
REGEX to match a keyboard name determines the behavior for that keyboard.


### `dual_key(TAP, HOLD [, MODE])`

A key which takes one of two actions based on how long it is held.  Both TAP
and HOLD should be actions.  Note that TAP cannot be a keymap action, and
neither TAP nor HOLD can be nested `dual_key()` actions.

A key is "held" if it is pressed for more than 200ms (not yet configurable) or
if some second key is both pressed and released before the first key is pressed
(press A, press B, release B, release A).  The in-between case (press A, press
B, release A, release B) is called "rollover", and its behavior is configurable
using the optional MODE argument.  MODE can be one of:

* `TAP_ON_ROLLOVER` (the default) should be used for making dual-mode keys out
of normal keys, like f.  When you press f, press another key, release f, and
release the other key, (a "rollover" situation in typing) you will get the
behavior specified by the TAP argument (probably a normal f)

* `HOLD_ON_ROLLOVER` should generally be used for making dual-mode keys out of
modifier keys, like shift.  When you press shift, press another key, release
shift, and release the other key, you will get the behavior specified by the
HOLD argument (probably apply shift to the second key).


### `macro(...)`, `shift(...)`, `ctrl(...)`

A macro is series of key names which should be pressed/released in sequence.
`shift()` and `ctrl()` are just macros where a modifier key will be held
throughout.  Key macros are composable, meaning that the key action defined by:

    macro(KEY_A, KEY_B, KEY_C, shift(KEY_A, KEY_B, KEY_C))

would type `abcABC` when triggered.


## Serving Over A Network

First: `sdiol` doesn't attempt to secure its network communication whatsoever
(yet), so don't do this unless you trust all devices which could possibly
access your network.  And even then, please don't type passwords or any
sensitive information through a `sdiol serve` process.

But if you are comfortable with the limitations, serving a keyboard and a mouse
could be done with a config file like:

    grab_keyboard(".*keyboard.*", {})

    -- future mouse support will include mouse-specific features,
    -- but until then mice are grabbed with grab_keyboard()
    grab_keyboard(".*mouse.*", {})

Then on the machine with the configuration file and with devices plugged into
it, run:

    sudo sdiol serve 12345 --config CONFIG_FILE

And from the second machine, run:

    sdiol connect ADDR 12345

Where `ADDR` is the ip address of the first machine (or a resolvable hostname).

If a new client connects to the `sdiol` server, the first client will be
disconnected.  In the future, `sdiol` will be able to maintain multiple client
connections and will support cycling through them using a keybinding on the
shared keyboard.


## Installing

Just run:

    sudo make install

In order to install and enable the default `systemd` service, you can run:

    sudo make install-systemd
    sudo systemctl enable --now sdiol.service

Note that the default `systemd` service depends on the existence of the default
config file at `/etc/sdiol/conf.lua`.


## Acknowledgements

`sdiol` began as a fork of [dzhu/keytap](https://github.com/dzhu/keytap).  Many
thanks to [dzhu](https://github.com/dzhu) for innovating such a flexible
architecture.

`khash.h` was taken from
[attractivechaos/klib](https://github.com/attractivechaos/klib).  Many thanks
to [attractivechaos](https://github.com/attractivechaos) for maintaining a
freely-available generics library for C.


## License

The file `khash.h` is from attractivechaos's
[klib](https://github.com/attractivechaos/klib) project.

All other source files are in the public domain, under the conditions of the
[Unlicense](https://unlicense.org/).
